# Bayesian-Modeling-of-Congressional-Bipartisanship

This project uses a bayesian, multi-level, varying-intercept model through R and JAGS to measure the strength of bipartisanship in Congress over time by evaluating observations about individual votes on various bills. The data set used is "Important Congressional Votes, 1991-2020", created by Jordan Tama for the purpose of investigating consequential voting patterns and political polarization. The data are collected from the Congressional Quarterly Almanac, defining "important" votes in Congress as those appearing in the CQ Almanac's yearly "Key Votes" report, which are the most major issues upon which Congress acted. The data set has 59 variables measuring different aspects of the vote on a specific legislation, including tallies for the Democratic and Republican party votes, ratios of bipartisanship and consensus, the type of vote, and other identifying information. There are 3,445 observations in total from 1991 to 2020, however they are not all complete cases. Many variables were missing 1551 observations, including the strength of bipartisanship measure, while a few others were missing over 2800 observations. Therefore, I utilized multiple imputation with 5 iterations, running the model 5 times on separate imputations and then averaging the results together. 

I found that although the strength of bipartisanship ratio in Congress varies between each unique Congress group, this variability does not outweigh the variation within each Congress itself. Therefore, it is only slightly beneficial to vary the intercepts by Congress number. However, I would argue that the variation it explains at the group level is beneficial enough to remain in the model, keeping the sigma.a of 0.128 from adding onto the sigma.y of 0.331. Furthermore, the model indicates correlations of differing strengths between an increased strength of bipartisanship during congressional election years, a decrease in strength of bipartisanship when the legislation is domestic policy, as well as a decrease in strength of bipartisanship as the year in which voting occurs increases. The reasons behind these relationships are yet unlcear, but these findings lay a foundation for future research investigating what may have caused them.
